.\" Copyright (c) revytechinc / wf-shell contributors
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd July 19, 2026
.Dt WF-AUDIO-INFO 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wf-audio-info
.Nd dump modular audio backend autodetection and device lists
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
exercises the
.Nm wf-shell
.Vt IAudioBackend
Factory/Builder without starting the panel.
It prints the platform tag, autodetected
.Vt AudioStackFeatures ,
Virtual OSS status
.Pq first-class when present ,
and playback/capture/logical device lists.
.Pp
Use it after install or when diagnosing routing
.Pq HDMI vs rear, mic jack, missing Pulse, absent virtual_oss .
Exit status is always 0 unless the process cannot start; missing
audio modules are reported as empty lists / false flags, not as
a crash.
.Sh OUTPUT
Typical sections:
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Sy platform
— freebsd, linux, or unknown.
.It
.Sy features (autodetect)
— logical_io, physical_devices, virtual_oss, hw_default_unit, mix_channels.
.It
.Sy virtual_oss
— available, running, control device; when running: play path, capture path, rate, bits, channels.
.It
.Sy playback devices / capture devices
— physical candidates
.Pq FreeBSD pcm* .
.It
.Sy logical outputs / inputs
— Pulse sinks/sources when
.Nm pactl
works.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
Uses PATH for
.Nm pactl
and
.Nm virtual_oss_cmd
unless the backend builder is given alternate binaries at compile time.
Default control device is
.Pa /dev/vdsp.ctl .
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr wf-shell-audio 7 ,
.Xr virtual_oss 8 ,
.Xr pactl 1
.Sh HISTORY
Part of the
.Nm wf-shell
audio backend smoke tooling
.Pq Factory/Builder validation .
