.\" Copyright (c) 2026 REVYTECH, Inc. and wf-shell contributors
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.Dd July 19, 2026
.Dt WF-SHELL-AUDIO 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wf-shell-audio
.Nd panel sound popover, Virtual OSS management, and audio backend
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This page documents the
.Nm wf-shell
panel sound UI
.Pq REVYTECH, Inc. fork:\&
.Lk https://github.com/revytechinc/wf-shell
and the modular
.Nm IAudioBackend
stack used on
.Fx
.Pq with optional Linux support .
The popover is intentionally sparse: controls only.
Operational detail, routing semantics, and failure modes live here
.Pq and in related pages ,
not as in-UI help text.
.Sh FREEBSD MODEL
On
.Fx
the preferred path is:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
applications → PulseAudio → virtual_oss (/dev/dsp) → OSS PCM
.Ed
.Pp
.Sy Virtual OSS is first-class
when autodetected
.Pq control device present, e.g.\& /dev/vdsp.ctl .
The UI then exposes play and capture routing plus a manage strip.
When Virtual OSS is absent, the Virtual OSS strip and footer badge are
hidden; the UI falls back to logical devices
.Pq Pulse sinks/sources
if available, or a quiet degraded state.
.Pp
Absence of a module is
.Em not
an error.
The panel must not crash or throw if
.Nm virtual_oss ,
.Nm pactl ,
or a given PCM is missing.
.Sh AUTODETECTION
The backend probes the live system via
.Fn features
and returns an
.Vt AudioStackFeatures
struct
.Pq all flags default false :
.Bl -tag -width "physical_devices"
.It Va logical_io
Pulse/PipeWire sinks and sources reachable
.Pq typically via pactl .
.It Va physical_devices
OS hardware list
.Pq Fx : /dev/sndstat pcm* .
.It Va virtual_oss
First-class
.Fx
module: control device present and preferred.
.It Va hw_default_unit
.Fx
.Va hw.snd.default_unit
supported.
.It Va mix_channels
Mix/open channel reconfiguration available when Virtual OSS is running.
.It Va virtual_oss_label
User-facing label
.Pq default Dq Virtual OSS
when
.Va virtual_oss
is true.
.El
.Pp
Also see
.Fn virtual_oss_status
for a live snapshot: available, running, play_path, record_path,
sample_rate, bits, channels, control_device.
.Sh PANEL POPOVER
.Ss Output
.Bl -bullet
.It
Volume slider and mute for the default playback path
.Pq GVC/Pulse default sink .
.It
Level meter with graph style and optional channel count
.Pq display preference; see CONFIGURATION .
.It
Full-width device dropdown: when Virtual OSS is active, selects the
.Em play
backend device
.Pq maps to set_playback_device / virtual_oss -P .
.El
.Ss Input
.Bl -bullet
.It
Mic volume and mute for the default capture path.
.It
Stereo level meter while the popover is open.
.It
Full-width device dropdown: when Virtual OSS is active, selects the
.Em capture
backend
.Pq set_capture_device / virtual_oss -R .
Only record-capable PCMs appear
.Pq e.g. rear/front analog; not HDMI play-only .
.El
.Ss Virtual OSS strip
Shown only when
.Va features.virtual_oss
is true.
Footer bottom-left shows a
.Sy Virtual OSS
badge that toggles the strip.
.Pp
The strip reports:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Play path and friendly device name
.It
Capture path and friendly device name
.It
Format: sample rate, bit width, mix channel count
.It
Control device
.Pq e.g. /dev/vdsp.ctl
.It
.Sy Mix ch
selector and
.Sy Apply mix
.Pq reconfigure open mix format; may reopen the daemon / Pulse path
.It
.Sy Refresh
re-queries
.Fn virtual_oss_status
.El
.Ss Advanced
Opens a full mixer
.Pq e.g. pavucontrol
for per-application streams.
Out of scope for the compact popover.
.Sh KEYBOARD AND POINTER
.Bl -tag -width "middle-click"
.It scroll on icon
Output volume.
.It Shift+scroll
Input
.Pq mic
volume.
.It middle-click
Mute output.
.It Esc
Close popover.
.El
.Sh BACKEND API SUMMARY
UI code talks only to
.Vt IAudioBackend
.Pq no OS ifdefs in the widget :
.Bl -tag -width "set_default_logical_output"
.It Fn platform_name
.Dq freebsd ,
.Dq linux ,
or
.Dq unknown .
.It Fn features
Autodetected module flags.
.It Fn list_playback_devices / list_capture_devices
Physical candidates.
.It Fn list_logical_outputs / list_logical_inputs
Pulse/PipeWire endpoints; monitors optional.
.It Fn virtual_oss_status
First-class FreeBSD snapshot; available=false is normal when missing.
.It Fn set_playback_device / set_capture_device
Route play/capture; returns
.Vt OpResult
.Pq never throws .
.It Fn set_default_logical_output / set_default_logical_input
Default sink/source.
.It Fn set_hw_default_unit
.Fx
.Va hw.snd.default_unit ;
no-op ok on Linux.
.El
.Pp
Factory construction:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
auto b = wf_audio::AudioBackendFactory::create();
auto b = wf_audio::AudioBackendFactory::builder()
             .control_device("/dev/vdsp.ctl")
             .prefer_virtual_oss(true)
             .build();
.Ed
.Sh CONFIGURATION
Shell settings live in
.Pa ~/.config/wf-shell.ini
section
.Bq panel
.Pq not wayfire.ini .
Keys
.Pq see metadata/panel.xml :
.Bl -tag -width "volume_show_monitor_sources"
.It Va volume_graph_style
Meter style; default
.Sy wave-fill .
.It Va volume_out_channels
Meter channel count preference 2/6/8.
.It Va volume_mix_channels
Preferred Virtual OSS mix channel count when apply is used.
.It Va volume_show_monitor_sources
Include Pulse
.Pa *.monitor
sources.
.It Va volume_play_device
Last play path
.Pq e.g. /dev/dsp1 .
.It Va volume_capture_device
Last capture path
.Pq e.g. /dev/dsp3 .
.It Va volume_mix_channels
Preferred mix channel count
.Pq 2, 6, or 8
when applying a Virtual OSS reopen.
.It Va volume_prefer_virtual_oss
If true and Virtual OSS is available, use it for routing.
.It Va volume_auto_switch_headset
Auto-route play to headset on jack plug
.Pq FreeBSD HDA / devd .
.It Va volume_auto_switch_usb
Auto-route when a USB sound device appears.
.It Va volume_auto_restore_previous
On unplug of an auto-switched device, restore the previous path if present.
.It Va volume_auto_switch_capture
Also switch capture when auto-switching to a headset with a mic.
.It Va volume_notify_device_change
Show a short notification on automatic routing changes.
.It Va volume_manual_sticky
Manual Output/Input selection blocks auto-switch until the next plug event.
.El
.Pp
These behaviour keys are
.Sy configuration only
.Pq Pa ~/.config/wf-shell.ini
or the settings UI that edits the same options .
They are
.Em not
all shown in the compact sound popover; that stays limited to volume, device
lists, meters, and Virtual OSS status.
.Pp
Defaults favour convenience
.Pq auto-switch and restore on .
Set any of the
.Va volume_auto_*
keys to
.Sy false
to require fully manual routing.
.Sh MIX CHANNELS VS METER CHANNELS
.Bl -bullet
.It
.Em Mix channels
are the open stream format for Virtual OSS
.Pq -C/-c
and what Pulse typically opens
.Pq e.g. s16le 2ch .
Changing them is an apply step, not only a paint preference.
.It
.Em Meter channels
are how many level traces the UI draws
.Pq 2/6/8 .
They should preferably track the live mix when Virtual OSS is running,
and clamp to device capability when switching outputs.
.El
.Sh DEVICE ELIGIBILITY
From
.Pa /dev/sndstat
on
.Fx :
.Bl -column "pcm flags" "Play list" "Capture list"
.It Sy pcm flags Ta Sy Play list Ta Sy Capture list
.It (play) only Ta yes Ta no
.It (play/rec) Ta yes Ta yes
.It (rec) only Ta no Ta yes
.It userspace dsp / dsp.loop Ta no Ta no
.El
.Sh HOTPLUG, HEADSET AUTO-SWITCH, AND RESTORE
.Ss USB sound devices
When a USB audio interface is plugged in, FreeBSD creates a new
.Nm pcm
unit and
.Pa /dev/dspN .
It appears on the next
.Fn list_playback_devices
or
.Fn list_capture_devices
call
.Pq re-read of /dev/sndstat .
When unplugged, it
.Em disappears
from those lists.
.Fn set_playback_device
returns
.Vt OpResult
with
.Va ok
false
.Pq Dq device not present
if the path is gone.
.Fn virtual_oss_status
exposes
.Va play_path_ok
and
.Va record_path_ok
so a dead Virtual OSS backend is visible even if the daemon still runs.
.Ss Headset jack presence
On many Realtek front panels the headset is a separate PCM
.Pq e.g. Front Analog /dev/dsp4
while the monitor may be HDMI
.Pq e.g. /dev/dsp1 .
The HDA driver can detect plug/unplug via pin sense and notifies userspace
with
.Nm devd
events of the form:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
system=SND subsystem=CONN type=OUT cdev=dsp4
.Ed
.Pq see hdaa_presence_handler in the FreeBSD kernel .
.Pp
That is the preferred signal for automatic headset switching.
If the pin is configured without presence detect, no event is emitted and
auto-switch does nothing
.Pq manual dropdown still works .
.Ss Automatic switch and restore previous speakers
When
.Va volume_auto_switch_headset
is enabled
.Pq default true once implemented :
.Bl -enum
.It
User is playing to speakers/HDMI
.Pq e.g. /dev/dsp1 .
.It
Headset is plugged
.Pq SND/CONN for the headset cdev .
Remember the current play path on a small stack, then
.Fn set_playback_device
to the headset path.
.It
Headset is unplugged.
If the current route was the auto-chosen headset, restore the previous path
if it still exists; otherwise pick the next present play device.
.El
.Pp
Manual selection in the Output dropdown overrides auto until the next plug
event
.Pq user choice is sticky .
The same pattern applies to USB audio when
.Va volume_auto_switch_usb
is enabled.
.Pp
Restore never crashes the panel: missing previous path yields a soft
fallback and a status toast only.
.Ss Recommended UI handling
.Bl -bullet
.It
Subscribe to
.Nm devd
.Pq or poll list_* as fallback
for CONN and USB audio attach/detach.
.It
Refresh device lists when the popover opens.
.It
Keep volume usable on the logical default sink if hardware routing is
temporarily invalid.
.El
.Sh LINUX AND OTHER HOSTS
Linux backends are Pulse-primary.
.Va virtual_oss
is usually false; the manage strip stays hidden.
.Fn set_playback_device
and
.Fn set_capture_device
map to default sink/source when no Virtual OSS path exists.
Unknown platforms use a null backend: empty lists, false features,
failed sets with a clear
.Vt OpResult.message .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "~/.config/wf-shell.ini"
.It Pa ~/.config/wf-shell.ini
Panel and volume options.
.It Pa /dev/vdsp.ctl
Typical Virtual OSS control device
.Pq configurable .
.It Pa /dev/dsp
Virtual OSS user device apps open via Pulse module-oss.
.It Pa /etc/rc.conf
.Va virtual_oss_*
rc variables for daemon flags
.Pq -P/-R/-C/-c, rate, bits .
.It Pa metadata/panel.xml
Option schema for the panel.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -tag -width "wf-audio-info"
.It Nm wf-audio-info
Print platform, features, Virtual OSS status, and device lists.
See
.Xr wf-audio-info 1 .
.It Nm wayfire-session
Session control from byobu
.Pq status, monitor, ensure, restart
when validating the panel under a live Wayland seat.
See
.Pa ~/bin/wayfire-session
and
.Pa docs/audio-control/SESSION-CONTROL.md
in the
.Nm wf-shell
tree.
.It Nm virtual_oss_cmd Ar /dev/vdsp.ctl
Low-level status
.Pq play/capture paths, rate, bits, channels .
.It Nm pactl Ar info / list short sinks / sources
Pulse default and endpoints.
.It Pa /dev/sndstat
OSS PCM inventory.
.It Nm grim
Wayland screenshot used as a health probe and for UI crop asserts.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr wf-audio-info 1 ,
.Xr pactl 1 ,
.Xr mixer 8 ,
.Xr virtual_oss 8 ,
.Xr virtual_oss_cmd 8
.Sh HISTORY
The modular
.Nm IAudioBackend
and
.Fx Ns -centric
Virtual OSS manager design were introduced in 2026 for the
.Nm wf-shell
panel by
.Sy REVYTECH, Inc.
.Pq Lk https://github.com/revytechinc/wf-shell .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An REVYTECH, Inc.
and
.Nm wf-shell
contributors.
